# -*- coding: utf-8; mode: structured-text  -*-

= User Interface Design Guidelines =

This document tries to cover user interface design concepts which are mostly
useful generally, but we would like to encourage their usage in Wiking
applications and show how Wiking supports them.

@TOC@

== Availability of User Interface Actions ==

User interface actions may be available/unavailable due to many reasons.  For
the purpose of UI design we distinguish two primary situations:

  * Action is unavailable for the current user due to access rights.
  * Action is unavailable due to some other condition.

The first situation should lead to the action control being completely removed
from the application.  Thus user's only see actions, which are allowed for
their role and are not disturbed by action controls which will never be
available.

The second case should be handled by leaving the action control on its place in
the disabled state.  Thus the user can find the control, but sees that it is
not usable in the current context.  For example after ordering the item in an
on-line store which doesn't allow multiple ordering of one item, the order
button should become disabled.  Removing the control may lead to user's
confusion, since he might believe, that he is only not able to find the control
and try to look for it all around the application.  Leaving the controls on
their place avoids this confusion.  The reason of the unavailability is often
obvious.  For example publishing is only available for unpublished articles and
it is not necessary to explain it.  Sometimes (as in the online store example
above) the reason is not so obvious, so it is a good idea to add an explanation
to the user interface somewhere near the disabled control.

Wiking supports both situations.  Actions defined through `wiking.Action'
specifications may use the 'enabled' argument to determine the availability
dynamically.  Action controls rendered through `PytisModule.\_action_menu()'
method automatically omit actions with insufficient access rights.  Action
controls rendered within the application using custom content/widgets should
implement the same behavior to preserve the consistency of the user interface.


== Response After User Actions ==

Most user actions within a web application require some form of feedback,
indicating that the record was deleted, registration was confirmed, item was
added to the shopping cart and so on.

Very typical mistake still common in many web applications is showing the
feedback on a separate page.  For example an error page is displayed as a
response to form submission with invalid data.  The page usually contains the
description of the error and the `Back' button, which leads the user back to
the form.  The problem is, that after the user gets back to the form, he might
not remember the details described on the error page.  When the submission is
successful, again, a separate page informing the user about the success is
displayed.  The user ends up on a page which has no other purpose than giving
him the feedback.  This practice harms user's orientation and smoothness of his
user experience.  

It is much more practical to always display something useful, what the user
most likely wants to do next.  The submitted form may be redisplayed after
validation errors showing the description of errors right within the form,
shopping cart contents may be displayed after adding an item, list of the
remaining records may be displayed after record deletion.  The user feedback
may be displayed as a part of the response page, but not as its only contents.

Wiking supports displaying feedback messages through the method
`WikingRequest.message()'.  Three kinds of messages can be displayed --
informational, error and warning.  The messages are displayed at the top of the
main page contents and visually emphasized.  This way their display is
consistent throughout the application and the user is able to locate and
identify them easily.

Handler methods performing user actions will typically validate the input,
perform a database operation and on its success call `req.message()' providing
the feedback.  After that, another handler method is typically called to render
the main page contents.  For example after record deletion,
`PytisModule.action_delete()' ends up calling `PytisModule.action_list()' to
render the list of remaining records.  All built in action methods respect this
principal.  The methods `PytisModule.\_redirect_after_insert()',
`PytisModule.\_redirect_after_update()' and
`PytisModule.\_redirect_after_delete()' may be overriding of the default
behavior for the respective PytisModule.





 
